# Meiosis

Meiosis is a specialized form of cell division that **reduces the
chromosome number by half** and results in the **formation of haploid
gametesâ€”sperm and egg cells** in animals, or spores in plants and fungi.
Unlike mitosis, which maintains the diploid chromosome number and
results in genetically identical daughter cells, **meiosis ensures
genetic diversity and is essential for sexual reproduction**. It occurs
**only in germ cells** and comprises **two successive divisions: meiosis
I** and **meiosis II**, following a single round of DNA replication.

The process of meiosis is tightly regulated by a complex interplay of
enzymes, structural proteins, and checkpoints to maintain genome
integrity and ensure proper chromosome segregation. Failures in meiosis
**can lead to aneuploidies such as trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)** and are
a leading cause of miscarriages and infertility.

## Pre-meotic phase

Prior to entering meiosis, **cells undergo interphase**, which includes
the G1, S, and G2 phases. During the **S phase, DNA replication**
occurs, resulting in each chromosome consisting of two sister chromatids
joined by a centromere. **Enzymes like DNA polymerase, helicase, ligase,
and topoisomerases** play their standard roles in accurately duplicating
the genome. Importantly, cohesin complexes are loaded during this phase
to hold sister chromatids together until anaphase.

<img src="Figures/Interphase-Meiosis.jpg" alt="Figure 1: Interphase"  />
<p class="caption">
Figure 1: Interphase
</p>

[Image Credit](https://www.sciencefacts.net/meiosis.html)

## Meosis I: Reductional Divison

The hallmark of meiosis I is the separation of homologous chromosomes,
**reducing the chromosome number from diploid (2n) to haploid (n)**.

### Prophase I

This is the longest and most complex stage of meiosis and is subdivided
into **five stages: leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene**, and
**diakinesis**.

During **leptotene**, chromosomes begin to **condense and become
visible**. In **zygotene, homologous chromosomes pair up in a process
known as synapsis**, facilitated by the synaptonemal complex, a protein
structure composed of SYCP1, SYCP2, and SYCP3 proteins.

In **pachytene, crossing over occurs between non-sister chromatids of
homologous chromosomes**. This genetic recombination is catalyzed by the
recombinase enzymes SPO11 (which introduces double-strand breaks),
RAD51, and DMC1 (which facilitate strand invasion and exchange). The
crossover sites are marked by the presence of MLH1, a mismatch repair
protein involved in resolving recombination intermediates.

During **diplotene, the synaptonemal complex disassembles, and
homologous chromosomes begin to separate** but remain **connected at the
crossover points, known as chiasmata**. In **diakinesis, chromosomes are
fully condensed**, and the nuclear envelope breaks down. Spindle
formation begins, regulated by cyclin B/CDK1 complexes.
