# Mitosis

Mitosis is a vital process that ensures the accurate division of the
nucleus and its genetic material. It occurs in somatic cells and results
in two daughter cells that are genetically identical to the parent cell.
Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, regeneration, and
asexual reproduction in multicellular organisms. Unlike meiosis, which
occurs in germ cells and results in genetic variation, mitosis maintains
the chromosome number of the parent cell and guarantees genetic
stability.

This complex but orderly process is part of the cell cycle and follows
DNA replication in the S phase. The M phase, or mitotic phase, includes
both mitosis and cytokinesis. It is governed by specific enzymes and
checkpoint controls to ensure error-free division.

### THE CELL CYCLE CONTEXT

The cell cycle is divided into four major phases:

-   **G1 Phase (First Gap)**: The cell grows and prepares enzymes and
    nutrients needed for DNA replication.

-   **S Phase (Synthesis)**: The entire genome is replicated. DNA
    polymerase is the major enzyme involved in the replication process.

-   **G2 Phase (Second Gap)**: The cell continues to grow and produce
    proteins and enzymes required for mitosis, including cyclins and
    CDKs.

-   **M Phase (Mitosis and Cytokinesis)**: The cell undergoes nuclear
    division followed by division of the cytoplasm.

### MOLECULAR CONTROL OF MITOSIS

Mitosis is tightly regulated by a complex network of proteins,
particularly:

-   **Cyclins**: Regulatory proteins whose concentrations vary
    cyclically in the cell.

-   **Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)**: Enzymes that, when bound to
    cyclins, phosphorylate target proteins to trigger progression
    through the cell cycle.

-   **Anaphase-Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C)**: A ubiquitin ligase
    that marks securin and mitotic cyclins for degradation, allowing the
    separation of sister chromatids and exit from mitosis.

Checkpoints ensure the integrity of the process:

-   **G2/M Checkpoint**: Verifies DNA replication completeness and
    damage repair.

-   **Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC)**: Prevents anaphase onset until
    all chromosomes are properly attached to spindle fibers.

## STAGES OF MITOSIS

Mitosis consists of five sequential stages, each with distinct molecular
and morphological events:

### 1. Prophase

Chromatin condenses into visible chromosomes composed of two sister
chromatids joined by a centromere. Centrosomes begin to migrate to
opposite poles of the cell, aided by motor proteins such as dynein and
kinesin. The mitotic spindle, composed of microtubules nucleated from
the centrosomes, begins to form. Nucleoli disappear, and the mitotic
machinery is assembled.

### 2. Prometaphase

The nuclear envelope breaks down through the action of cyclin B-CDK1
complex. Microtubules now have access to the chromosomes and attach at
specialized protein structures on the centromeres known as kinetochores.
Chromosome movement is powered by kinesin motors and depolymerization of
microtubules. The spindle apparatus continues to grow.

### 3. Metaphase

All chromosomes align along the metaphase plate (equatorial plane). This
alignment is stabilized by the bipolar attachment of kinetochores to
spindle fibers from opposite poles. The SAC ensures that each chromosome
is properly attached; otherwise, the cell halts progression. This
prevents chromosome mis-segregation.

### 4. Anaphase

Cohesin, the protein complex that holds sister chromatids together, is
cleaved by the protease separase. This is triggered by the degradation
of securin, mediated by the APC/C. The now-separated chromatids are
pulled to opposite poles by shortening of kinetochore microtubules and
motor protein action. This ensures equal distribution of genetic
material.

### 5. Telophase

Chromosomes reach the poles and begin to decondense into chromatin.
Nuclear envelopes reassemble around each set of chromosomes, driven by
reassembly of nuclear lamins and nuclear pore complexes. The mitotic
spindle disassembles. Two nuclei are now present in one cell.

### CYTOKINESIS

Cytokinesis is the physical separation of the cytoplasm into two
daughter cells. It usually overlaps with telophase.

-   In **animal cells**, a contractile ring of actin and myosin II
    filaments forms beneath the plasma membrane, generating a cleavage
    furrow that deepens until the cell splits.

-   In **plant cells**, vesicles derived from the Golgi apparatus
    coalesce at the center to form a cell plate, which matures into a
    new cell wall.
